Let's look at the electrocardiogram,
which can be abbreviated as ECG or EKG.
Typically, when we speak it we say EKG,
so we don't confuse it with an EEG,
which is a different biomedical sensor.
The EKG measures the voltage across the chest,
which is primarily caused by the electrical activity in the heart.
Unlike other sensors, cardiologists and doctors can interpret
the EKG waveform to diagnose things like prior heart attacks or irregular heart rhythms.
Typically, the EKG is actually composed of
12 different signals or leads by placing multiple electrodes all over your chest.
Each lead measures the electrical activity
from a different axis and allows the cardiologists to
examine different parts of the heart or look
for specific arrhythmias that only show up in one lead or another.
So you might imagine this traditional setup for an EKG,
where there's a patient lying on a bed and there's a technician and
a giant bedside EKG machine with electrodes all over the chest or limbs.
This is certainly not very wearable,
but if we remove some of the electrodes and some of the leads,
we can then build sensors that are more mobile.
For example, the Zio patch is a chest worn device
that measures of the EKG continuously over two weeks.
Next, we have the AliveCor device,
which is a handheld device that can
intermittently measure EKG by pairing with a smartphone.
We're also starting to see EKG sensors on
wrist wearables like the Apple Watch or Verily Study Watch.
So the ECG has a very characteristic shape with specific waves,
each with their own names.
Identification of each of these waves is an important part of
ECG signal processing because deviations about these waves,
either the shape or the timing can point to problems in the physiology.
In lesson 4, we'll dive deeper into the physiology of
the heart to understand how these EKG waves are created.